# Characterising rocky intertidal biodiversity using environmental DNA metabarcoding from local to national scales

*Simons D-L, Hipperson H, Webb TJ, Spencer M, Mieszkowska N*

This GitHub repository contains data and R code for reproducing analyses presented in Simons et al 2025, "Characterising rocky intertidal biodiversity using environmental DNA metabarcoding from local to national scales". If you reuse any scripts or data in this project, please cite the paper.

**Abstract:** Climate change is reshaping marine ecosystems globally by affecting organism survival and altering species distributions. Efficient and scalable methods for monitoring climate-sensitive systems are critical to address such changes amid limited resources. Environmental DNA (eDNA) metabarcoding has emerged as a promising tool for detecting coastal marine taxa, but the spatial resolution of the method (i.e., the ability to differentiate communities from different locations) remains insufficiently understood, particularly in dynamic intertidal environments. Here, we evaluate the effectiveness and resolution of eDNA in detecting rocky intertidal taxa across three spatial scales – national, regional, and local - in the United Kingdom. We detected 1054 target taxa within 455 families and 19 phyla using two established primers targeting invertebrates (CO1) and macroalgae (18S rRNA). Moderately distinct eDNA signals were found at all spatial scales, indicating local discreteness even between vertical shore heights within the same sites. However, communities were more discrete at larger scales (i.e. between UK Regional Seas) than smaller scales (i.e. within sites). eDNA signals were more strongly structured by geographic location than by vertical shore height, likely as a consequence of greater mixing and DNA homogenisation at smaller spatial scales. eDNA signals also aligned with established rocky shore ecological patterns, with higher diversity and more taxa observed at lower shore positions, reflecting the limiting effects of environmental extremes in harsher high shore zones. Regionally, detections of cold-water species increased with latitude, while warm-water species declined with latitude. Our work supports emerging evidence that eDNA has strong potential for multi-scale biodiversity monitoring, even in dynamic marine environments. We provide practical recommendations for tailoring eDNA sampling on rocky reefs and integrating the method alongside existing routine ecological monitoring. These insights contribute to the advancement of biodiversity monitoring in temperate marine systems under a changing climate.



